This double sided composition was illustrated for Akbar by L’al, and takes place in Pattan North West India, January 22 1573.
Depicting the victory of the Mughal Army led by Qutb ad-Din and Azim Khan over the rebels Muhammad Husain Mirza and Sher Khan Fuladi.
The history of this fateful day commences with the exile of Muhammad Husain Mirza’s brother Ibrahim Husain Mirza being driven out of Gujrat, and in retaliation, the rebel leaders descended upon the town of Patan with their army.
Upon hearing the news of the gathering rebels, the imperial generals assemble their forces and venture to Pattan to intervene.
We are led to believe from the text that the composition on the right is suppose to represent the imperial army, and the one on the left the enemy.
As the day progresses the entirety of the rebel army has not arrived, and Sher Khan as an act of desperation and deceit sent men to the imperial army and proposes a reconciliation.
Discussions commence and someone whispers to Azim Khan, “Beware, and do not agree to peace: the object of this crooked-minded crew is to put off the time.” to which Azim Khan replied,
“My opinion is the same as yours. As the minds of the officers were inclined for peace, and they did not understand the matter, and Sher Khān's agents used deceitful language.”
“ If you are really for peace retire from the place where you are and encamp until we come to you, for it is not seemly for us to retreat.”
As the words of this crew were deceptive and had no sincerity about them, they did not agree to this proposition. And the imperial officers proceeded to the battlefield.
The Akbarnama has given us slight indications on where significant characters in the narrative could be situated, and one can only deduce important figures by distinguishing features.
The Akbarnama describes rebel leader Sher Khan as being in the centre, and one could propose that because each individual figure is distinguished by localised colour,
that the only man in the central area wearing a dark tone, could signify someone of importance.
Muhammad Mirza is described as being placed on the right.
The composition doesn’t blatantly differentiate characters of importance, but one can assume that this could be Muhammad Mirza,
, as he is on the right of what I am led to believe is Sher Khan,
and his lack of facial hair in contrast to the men surrounding him displays youth, as he would have only been 20 years old during this battle.
On the imperial side, Qutb is expressed as being on the right wing, and Azim Khan in the centre.
We are made aware of two characters who appear to be holding maces which are usually associated with Mughal warriors of considerable rank.
Leading us to assume that these two figures are central to the battle.
As seen in many of L’al compositions we are introduced to his experimentation with realism.
When considering all of the figures we see an attention to detail in the texture in the hair and facial features,
additionally this depiction of realism is applied to their horses, with their long arched necks and slim mussels, flared nostrils, parted mouths, covered in intricate patterns and war regalia.
Furthermore, we see this realistic depiction when examining the elephants, who are rendered with an extraordinary understanding of their monumental size, shape, and texture.
As well as an inclusion of regional elements like these meandering hills, cactus, and depictions of trees expressed with great textural quality.
The Battle ensues, and we are led to believe that this specific scene is representational of moments before the victory of the imperial army.
The folios are not of equal value, with the imperial army spanning over two thirds of the whole composition,
conveying to the viewer the overwhelming strength and mass of the imperial army who prevail to reclaim the city of Pattan for Akbar,
and his pursuit of dominating the territory of Gujrat, in becoming a province of the Mughal Empire.